.TH LOG_ANONYMIZER 8 "2025-10-13" "1.0" "System Administration Commands"
.SH NAME
log_anonymizer \- anonymize sensitive information in log files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B log_anonymizer.py
.RB [ \-h ]
.B \-i
.I INPUT_FILE
.B \-o
.I OUTPUT_FILE
.RB [ \-t
.IR TEMP_DIR ]
.RB [ \-\-config
.IR CONFIG ]
.RB [ \-\-log\-level
.IR LEVEL ]
.RB [ \-\-script\-log\-file
.IR SCRIPT_LOG_FILE ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B log_anonymizer
is a tool designed to anonymize sensitive information contained in email log files.
It processes input log files and generates anonymized output files by applying
configurable anonymization rules to protect private data while maintaining
the utility of the logs for debugging and analysis purposes.
.PP
The tool supports customizable anonymization rules through configuration files
and provides comprehensive logging capabilities to track the anonymization process.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Display help message and exit.
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-input\-file " " \fIINPUT_FILE\fR
Specify the input log file to be anonymized. This option is mandatory.
.TP
.BR \-o ", " \-\-output\-file " " \fIOUTPUT_FILE\fR
Specify the output file where the anonymized log will be written. This option is mandatory.
.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-temp\-dir " " \fITEMP_DIR\fR
Specify an optional temporary directory to use during processing. If not provided,
the system default temporary directory will be used.
.TP
.BR \-\-config " " \fICONFIG\fR
Specify a configuration file containing custom anonymization rules. This allows
fine-tuning of the anonymization behavior to match specific requirements.
.TP
.BR \-\-log\-level " " \fILEVEL\fR
Set the logging level for the script execution. Valid values are:
.BR DEBUG ", " INFO ", " WARNING ", " ERROR ", and " CRITICAL .
This controls the verbosity of diagnostic output during execution.
.TP
.BR \-\-script\-log\-file " " \fISCRIPT_LOG_FILE\fR
Specify an optional path to a file where script execution logs will be saved.
If not provided, logs are output to standard error only.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Basic anonymization of a log file:
.PP
.nf
.RS
python3 log_anonymizer.py \-i /var/log/mail.log \-o /tmp/mail_anonymized.log
.RE
.fi
.PP
Anonymization with custom configuration and debug logging:
.PP
.nf
.RS
python3 log_anonymizer.py \-i /var/log/mail.log \-o /tmp/safe.log \\
    \-\-config /etc/anonymizer/rules.conf \\
    \-\-log\-level DEBUG \\
    \-\-script\-log\-file /var/log/anonymizer_execution.log
.RE
.fi
.PP
Using a custom temporary directory:
.PP
.nf
.RS
python3 log_anonymizer.py \-i input.log \-o output.log \-t /mnt/fast_storage/tmp
.RE
.fi
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/anonymizer/rules.conf
Default location for system-wide anonymization rules configuration (if applicable).
.TP
.I ~/.config/anonymizer/config
User-specific configuration file (if applicable).
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Successful completion.
.TP
.B 1
General error occurred during execution.
.TP
.B 2
Invalid command-line arguments or missing required options.
.SH NOTES
The script requires Python 3 to run. Ensure that all required Python dependencies
are installed before execution.
.PP
Large log files may require significant temporary disk space during processing.
Use the
.B \-t
option to specify a temporary directory with adequate space if needed.
.PP
The quality of anonymization depends on the rules defined in the configuration file.
Review and test your configuration thoroughly before processing sensitive production logs.
.SH SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS
While this tool anonymizes data according to configured rules, it is the
administrator's responsibility to:
.IP \(bu 3
Verify that all sensitive data types are properly covered by anonymization rules
.IP \(bu 3
Securely handle both input and output files
.IP \(bu 3
Properly dispose of temporary files
.IP \(bu 3
Review anonymized output before sharing with untrusted parties
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at:
.UR https://github.com/monozoide/MailLogSentinel/issues
.UE
.SH AUTHOR
MailLogSentinel Project
.SH COPYRIGHT
This utility is part of the MailLogSentinel project.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR maillogsentinel (8),
.BR sed (1),
.BR awk (1),
.BR grep (1),
.BR logrotate (8)